we begin in southern Gaza where the raah
border crossing has been closed on the
Palestinian side due to the presence of
Israeli tanks according to the Border
Authority Israeli tanks are now blocking
the main archery bringing humanitarian
Aid into the strip parts of which are
already experiencing a fullblown famine
that comes after a night of heavy
Israeli bombardment in ra and Southern
Gaza at least 14 Palestinians have been
killed by Israeli strikes just in the
past few hours the attacks follow a
unanimous vote by the Israeli War
cabinet to continue its operation in the
city and come despite Hamas saying that
it's ready to accept a ceasefire
deal intense bombardment very very
intense bombardment air strikes Rockets
artillery shelling tank shelling drones
all firing at us never in my life I am
69 years old have I ever seen
bombardment like this and I have
witnessed several Wars I have never seen
a war like this one and I really wanted
to leave to evacuate but I couldn't the
reason was that I found this injured
young man We rescued him but the whole
area is completely and utterly
destroyed well Israel has ordered at
least 100,000 Palestinians to leave
Eastern ra since the War Began Israel
has forced Palestinians to leave the
north from Gaza City to De bah in the
center to Kan yunus in the South and
then to RAF nearly 1 and a half million
Palestinians are crowded into Rafa in
the southernmost point of the strip and
now the Israeli military has ordered all
residents and displaced people to leave
the Eastern neighborhoods of raah it
says they must move to the al- maasi
area near the coastline just hours
before Israel renewed its attacks on
Rafa Hamas said it had accepted a
ceasefire deal and for a short while
Palestinians in Gaza thought the war was
over but the celebrations were brief as
Israel said the deal doesn't meet its
requirements the deputy head of Hamas in
Gaza KH has said that the group received
assurances from mediators about the
potential
deal mediators told us that the US
president is clearly committed to
ensuring the implementation of the
agreement the ball is now on the court
of the Israeli occupation we informed
the mediators that we agree completely
with the proposal the mediators now
should put pressure on the Israeli side
to agree as well as soon as possible but
if the occupation wants to continue the
war the onus is on the mediators and the
International Community but we did what
we were supposed to do and we're patient
we will own our land and I think we did
everything for our people and in this
stage of the negotiations we achieved
all the goals we talked about on the
first day a full ceasefire the full
withdrawal of the Israeli troops the
return of the displaced with no
conditions and the aid for our people
and a deal for the exchange of prisoners
we will continue until the end to free
our captives from the occupation's jails
we have with us Muhammad jamj who's
joining us now from the Jordanian
Capital Aman so Muhammad Israel has
taken control of the ra Crossing
according to them what more are you
hearing about
this so darine this is what we've heard
heard thus far from the Israeli Army in
the last couple of hours statements
saying that the Israeli military has
said that their forces have taken
operational control of the Gaza side of
the raah crossing that borders Egypt and
that there are special forces scanning
the area it adds that Israeli military
says that forces operating in specific
areas of Eastern rat that they are there
in specific areas of Eastern raah uh
also uh there's another statement that
says that there have been many people
that have been evacuated from the area
of military operations that of course is
not independently confirmed but that is
what the Israeli military is stating at
this hour they had said in the past that
they were setting up evacuation
corridors but again as I said that is
nothing that has been independently
verified and then also we've seen a
statement from the Israeli military
saying that the km Abu Salam Crossing
has been closed for security reasons and
that it will reopen once the security
situation allows now that last point is
of particular interest because in the
readout of the call that happened
between Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin
Netanyahu and US President Joe Biden the
White House readout of that call that
happened on Monday evening uh the White
House stated that Benjamin Netanyahu had
committed to reopening that Crossing for
the delivery of Aid into Gaza now we're
hearing from the military that they have
closed it for security reasons but that
it will reopen as soon as the security
situation calms down so it will be
interesting to see if we hear more about
that from the isra or from the Americans
in the coming hours one more thing I'd
like to mention deine is the fact that
in the last hour we've also heard from
the opposition leader in Israel Yer leid
uh essentially reacting to what is going
on in rafah today he gave an interview
to Israeli Army Radio in which among
many of the things he said one of the
things he said was that if it had been
him that he would have waited to do this
operation for at least another 48 hours
so that there would be more time for
negotiators to try to work out a deal in
Cairo and to get a ceasefire uh into
effect so that those captives still
being held in Gaza can be returned to
their loved ones in Israel right and
Muhammad I mean speaking of these
negotiations we know that Israel has now
sent negotiators over to Cairo but
they've also said and besides a comment
that you just uh made by Yer lared
Israel officials have said that the deal
is really a long way from being
acceptable what can we expect to happen
in
Cairo well dar it's going to be
interesting to see how this transpires
because in the past when negotiators uh
and mediators pardon me when negotiators
have been sent delegations from the
Israeli side to Cairo and other areas uh
there have been often times when the
Prime Minister has not given them really
a wide mandate to fully negotiate um
where he has insisted that they continue
to consult with him in the war cabinet
before they can take actions that that
might uh ease the way into some kind of
a final negotiation or final ceasefire
so a lot is going to depend on how wide
of a mandate these negotiators have
what's interesting about all this is
that up until yesterday even uh before
the announcement that Hamas was
accepting the deal that was proposed to
them uh you had the Israeli is
continuing to say that they were not
going to send a delegation to Cairo
until and unless they had a response
from Hamas that they considered to be
positive so what exactly does this mean
clearly it shows that there is some
momentum but how much momentum the
Israelis have indicated uh in quotes
that they've given to Israeli media
Outlets that there are still large gaps
uh that this is not something that's
going to be easy um it really kind of
speaks to the fact that the Prime
Minister Benjamin Netanyahu is under a
lot of pressure uh politically right now
he's under pressure from the far
right-wing members of of his Coalition
people like uh national security
minister itar bin gav who continues to
insist uh that the Prime Minister go
into rafah with full force even
yesterday on Twitter he maintained that
stance and he's often threatened to walk
away from the government if that does
not happen then again as in the comments
we were talking about just a moment ago
the opposition of course is after
Netanyahu people like AER Leed the
opposition uh head in Israel to try and
negotiate to make sure that there can be
a ceasefire so that those captives can
be released so it's a very interesting
political Dynamic that's going on in
Israel right now and it seems that the
political landscape there for Netanyahu
is really narrowing as far as what he
can do it seems to be crucial hours but
it's very unclear what these delegation
these negotiators are going to do we'll
just have to wait and see uh and and
just one more thing to add when it comes
to Israel of course Netanyahu is also
under a lot of pressure from members of
society there who want him to enter into
a ceasefire you saw last night in Tel
Aviv and hia and Jerusalem thousands of
people who came out once again on the
streets demonstrating saying that the
time is now these are crucial hours and
that the Israeli government needs to
sign on the dotted line and get those
captives to come back to their loved
ones um we should also mention one last
thing Dar I am now in Aman we are
reporting from Jordan on all this
because we are not allowed to report
from Israel uh and uh and that is why we
were coming up from Aman reporting on
these Israeli lines right now okay
Muhammad thank you so much for all that
reporting from Aman we'll now cross over
to Gaza and bring in hanni Mahmud he's
joining us from murah specifically so
hanni uh the border crossing is closed
what have you been hearing and seeing on
the ground
yes well the the decision to Clos down
ra Crossing because of the the presence
of the Israeli military tanks and we've
seen a video of how Israeli tanks and
armored vehicle are causing great deal
of vandalism inside the property of the
ra Crossing just causing now a great
deal of uncertainty of what's going to
happen in terms of the flow of a
humanitarian Aid into the Gaza Strip ra
Crossing for the past months has been
quite vital even though it was on a slow
and a low level entry of a humanitarian
but it kept flowing every once in a
while providing NE necessities and and
much needed uh aid for people right now
with this complet closure uh on top of
the ongoing intense bombing campaign
that is started within the past 24 hours
that started with the evacuation orders
sharply ordering people to uh evacuate
to designate safe Zone into the uh
evolving uh events of intense bombing
campaign that is started with artillery
Shilling and as of early this morning uh
we can safely say that Israel military
has taken over the Eastern the entire
eastern part of raah city under heavy
coverage of intense bombing and and and
fire and artillery Shilling all the way
to ra cring the Gaza Strip right now is
sealed off cut off completely from the
remaining parts of the region uh not
only it's it's causes it's to prevent
people from leaving or coming into the G
but it also is going to stop the flow of
humanitarian Aid that's an issue that
has been quite critical within the past
seven months and it developed into
becoming quite difficult ra Crossing is
one of five more landed crossings that
have been virtually blocked by the
Israeli military including uh the one in
the northern part that's irit Crossing
in which the Israeli military stated
that it's going to allow more
humanitarian a but in fact it did not
happen only trickle amount of it but
this all together has been been causing
a great deal of of a trauma on people in
ra particularly the 1.5 million people
have been displace it traumatized and
yet they are evacuating for the third
the fourth and the fifth time for so
many of them trying to find shelters
elsewhere as on my way to this side I've
seen tens of cars hundreds in fact of
cars carrying uh taking people to other
parts of the Y and here right now this
is a car bringing injuries from the
eastern part of RA city as the bombing
continues to to happen yeah so hany when
people are told to evacuate to these
so-called safe zones I mean as we've
been reporting throughout months of this
war people have been telling us there's
no safe area in Gaza so where do they
actually go
to well people are taking the matter in
their hands right now and they're trying
to find wherever there's a possibility
just a tin a bit of safety knowing in
fact there is no saf place at all in
Gaza but they're not taking the Israeli
narrative in terms of safety safe zones
and safe area across the Gaza Strip the
past experience have been very difficult
uh for displaced families who Ed up
being killed or or or bombed Within
These safe Zone within hours and
sometimes within days of their arrival
this has shattered innocense of safety
it created a huge deal of mistrust of
what the Israeli military is saying but
what we're seeing on the ground so far
is contradictory misleading and vague
largely the very areas that designated
as safe zone for people are not in fact
safe with SE masasi evacuation Zone
that's the western part of kanun and ra
City where bombed repeatedly people in
their tents were killed by the flying
shrap naels and the depri falling and
killing them inside on top of that the
the Special Operations that were
conducted by the Israeli military inside
of masasi evacuation Zone within the
past two months just it shattered any
remaining sense of safety or any uh
talks about there are actually safe Zone
what people are right now talking about
is this is a war zone created by the
Israeli military and you can't have a
safe Zone in a war zone okay hany thank
you so much for that update from RA in
Gaza well here's what we know about the
contents of the proposed ceasefire deal
so the proposal includes three phases
each lasting 42 days the first phase of
the deal includes providing passage for
displaced Palestinians to return to
their homes then the second phase of the
deal includes the withdrawal of Israeli
troops and the announcement of a
permanent end to Israeli military
operations in the third stage there's a
provision on ending the blockade on the
Gaza Strip we're now joined by Mark Owen
Jones who's an associate professor of
Middle East studies at hammad bin
Khalifa University welcome back to Al
jazer so um just take stock for me of
where we are right now Hamas said that
they accept The seasar Proposal the
Israelis are now sending a delegation to
Cairo yes well we are waiting for the
Israeli response to this but let's bear
in mind that about three or four days
ago Israel and Netanyahu also left Cairo
uh in what looked like a sabotage of the
ceasefire talks right an interesting
aspect of the recent when Hamas said
that they' accepted the Qatar Egypt
mediated proposal um it was then
reported in Israeli media that this was
a ruse designed to make Israel look like
they had sabotaged the the deal but in
fact we know about three or four days
ago that Israel was done had done the
very same and there was an opad in haret
saying the very same thing that
Netanyahu had deliberately been
provocative during those what looked
like positive ceasefire negotiations he
had said during the negotiations that he
was not going to budge on the invasion
of RFA and then this undermined the
whole negotiation because this was still
very much on the table so it seemed that
he was sabotaging the ceasefire deal
four days ago and that's why the
Israelis left Cairo um and so so we have
this kind of situation where there's a
blame G going on but it's very clear
that Netanyahu as he has been the whole
seven months not interested in a
ceasefire and and the reasons have been
stated many times he does not
necessarily want the war to end right
the war the the War ending for him means
accountability not just domestically for
his various criminal accusations but now
potentially by the international
criminal court okay so going into these
talks right so going into these talks I
mean what do you expect to happen what
what you understand the the mandate to
be for those uh for the Israeli
delegation team there I think the
Israeli delegation team will be stuck on
a number of things one of those will
probably be the fact that one of the
demands now or one of the the the the
kind of propositions in the ceasefire is
to end the Israeli blockade of Gaza
which has been going on for a long time
that was always one of the sticking
points but that was always one of the
sticking points so I don't know how
they're going to use this one but the
other one is was Rafa what's curious
about this is now Israel have actually
gone into Rafa or at least bomb
increased the bombing there there's the
increased kind of mobilization of troops
around Rafa they blocked the aid
processings they've told people to leave
is this a way of yo to train same facei
saying that he did go into Rafa and that
he's he might draw a line on it just so
he's able to say I went into Rafa and
then it stopped or not because I think
this will be the issue I think the
complete military withdrawal of Israel
from Gaza is also going to be another
sticking point but there might be some
negotiation about that I think some of
the demands that maybe Hamas have
accepted in this deal are ones that they
might be willing to drop the blockade of
Gaza might be one of them I think that
has to be or will rather be part of a
political solution down the line I
wonder what makes you say that because
that is something that h has always said
that is one of their key demands it's a
key demand but I just don't think
necessarily that there's going to be the
political support for that demand and
it's not something that the people
brokering or at least trying to
guarantee uh the the the kind of
longevity the seire such as the United
States would necessarily see as a
priority so they might be saying to
Hamas 2 like this one is not necessarily
going to be one of the priorities in
this I think at the end of the day that
political solution will be sort of
kicked further down the field at least
that's that's my analysis it could be
wrong does the ra operation pressure h
in any way and is n Netanyahu trying to
um perhaps change or influence the facts
on the ground ahead of these as these
negotiations take place well if we look
at the timing it's very interesting so
you know Hamas said they had accepted
the ceasefire deal after it became clear
that there was going to be a campaign in
Rafa right so it seemed that Hamas were
very much reacting to what Netanyahu had
ordered in Rafa so it does seem that if
that was a pressure move that was
successful alternatively maybe Hamas
always knew that you know he was going
to go in ra then and this was part of
their play and that Netanyahu left Cairo
to go back to arrange this ra this move
I think it will put pressure on them
because it shows that there is a
willingness to go into to raer and we
saw that you know the people celebrating
in Palestine for the CI shows that there
is this strong desire amongst
Palestinians uh to end this war but also
at least have a ceasefire and we also
know that the Israelis have been very
much trying to uh demonize Hamas within
Gaza to get Palestinians turned against
them Hamas can only you know maintain a
certain level of power in in in Gaza so
long as they have some degree of supp
and Palestinians and it clearly looks
like there is such a strong desire now
ceasefire in in in Gaza it's it's going
to be untenable at some point for Hamas
to keep uh you know basically not
agreeing to a deal even if that deal is
actually unjust and unfair and and is
mostly driven by Israeli interests okay
thank you Marco and Jones thanks so
much make sure to subscribe to our
channel to get the latest news from Al J
zero